The Holarctic genus Pedicia Latreille, 1809 is a small taxonomic unit with three subgenera, Amalopis Haliday, 1856 (with 12 species group taxa, including 2 subspecies of P. tenuiloba Alexander, 1957) and Crunobia Kolenati, 1859 (with 16 species). The distribution of these two subgenera is limited within the Palaearctic area, while the remaining subgenus Pedicia (with 33 species) extends to the whole Holarctic region (Oosterbroek 2015). The taxonomy of all three subgenera is poorly studied, and recent studies reveal incompletely described biodiversity and important cryptic diversity even from regions that have been better-studied, such as the Western Palaearctic or North America (Ujvárosi and Starý 2003, Ujvárosi and Bálint 2012, Paramonov 2009, Petersen 2006). Crunobia was established as a separate genus by Kolenati (1859) for the European widespread species straminea (Meigen, 1838) [as C. schienerii (Kolenati, 1859)] and later as a subgenus of Pedicia by Edwards (1938). The adults belonging to Crunobia have important features that are distinct from the features of adults of Amalopis or Pedicia. For instance, Crunobia adults have no conspicuous dark triangles or stripes on the wings, proctiger not sclerotized (membranous) and the gonostylus has only one complicated projection with 2?11 stout black thorns on its dorsal surface (Dienske 1987). Species belonging to this subgenus are present mostly in different mountainous ranges of Europe, with only a few species recorded from Turkey and the Northern Caucasus so far. Only a single species was discovered in Eastern Asia (Alexander 1938, Oosterbroek 2015). However, this species (P. patens Alexander, 1938) should be excluded from this group, due to the sharp differences of the male genital structures. Savchenko (1986) recognized two morphologically distinct species groups in Crunobia based on the number of chitinous thorns of the dorsal apex of the gonostylus. The most species-rich ?littoralis? group has only two (three in the case of P. nielseni) black spines, while the remaining species belonging to the ?staryi? group have more than two such projections. The systematic position of the Eastern Asian P. patens remains uncertain. The European P. straminea (Meigen, 1838) is the most widespread member of the staryi species group; the remaining species are endemics with limited range in the Carpathians (P. apusenica Ujvárosi & Starý, 2003; P. lobifera Savchenko, 1986; and P. staryi Savchenko, 1978) and the Balkan Range (P. spinifera Starý, 1974). Pedicia spinifera was first described from the Rila Mountains, and similar specimens were also later discovered in the Rhodope Mountains in Bulgaria (Kolcsár et al. 2012). These species share many common features with P. straminea, but differ because they have a spine in the middle of the interbasis. The remaining three species are microendemics limited to the Carpathians and found in only one or a few mountain enclaves. In the case of P. staryi the specimens were first described from a small area in the Ukrainian Carpathians, and were also later discovered in the Eastern and Southern Carpathians (Ujvárosi 2005). The case of P. lobifera is similar. First described by Savchenko in 1986, it has long been considered a species restricted to the Ukrainian Carpathians, but was later discovered in the Eastern Carpathians, Romania, as well (Kolcsár et al. 2012). The most problematic situation is with the newest member of the group, P. apusenica (Ujvárosi and Starý 2003), which has been found in an isolated region of the Carpathians, the Apuseni Mountains. Initially considered a sister species of P. spinifera (due to very limited material available at the time), the distinctive characters identified in the original description did not exemplify a clear delineation between P. staryi and P. apusenica. A revision of the entire species group was suggested on the basis of an intensive sampling in the whole distribution area. Later, an exceptionally high molecular variability was detected within the P. staryi group, hence the emerging need for a comprehensive revision (Dénes et al. 2015).
